Comenzar, what do you think that means?
Comenzar?
To commence.
To commence, or to start.
To stop.
Again, this exists and you can use it and it's probably easier because it sounds like comments, so it's easier to remember.
But there's another verb which is more common, which is empezar
Empezar.
This is a Z, so that's gonna sound th in Spain.
Empezar in most of Spain.
Empezar.
Practice with this one for now.
This is to start.
How do you say I start?
Good that's what it should be, but what might happen?
Empiezo.
He starts.
Empiece.
What must you do before you make that decision?
What must you do?
You must go back to the two form.
It's a very important habit.
It's empesar.
Ah.
Empeza.
Good.
And then what might be the next step after Empieza?
Empieza.
So this is the process we want to take.
It's essential for us to get into that habit of going back to the two form and then we know where we are.
Otherwise it's guesswork.
Empieza.
Empieza empieza.
They start.
Empieza.
Empiezan.
Good.
You informal.
Empiezas.
Good.
When are you starting?
Cuanto empiezas.
So the E can split to IE.
That's something we need to know about the present and it's something we need to be on top of.
Now it's in the present that this happens because as we know
One of the fundamental elements of the present tense is to have that accent on the penultimate syllable.
So it's having the accent on the penultimate syllable that makes that E vulnerable to splitting
The E might split to IE or the O might split to UE.
We know this already actually because we have puedo
And this is a split O.
To be able or to can, of course there is no to can in English.
To be able, we say, is poder.
Here actually you can see closer that connection with power.
Before I said that the word is related to the word power in English.
El poder.
El is the masculine.
We also saw it's the word for he.
It's also the word for the for masculine words.
El poder is the power.
So here it's a noun.
It looks like a verb, but if it has the in front of it, we know it's a noun.
El poder, the power.
Poder to be able.
When you take off your ending and you change it for present tense and you stress that oh it splits into UE and you get puedo
Again, we can see the same phenomenon happening between words in English and Spanish.
So for example, we have the word port in English, but we say Puerto Rico
Puerto Rico means the rich pot.
Rico means rich or nice or tasty or sweet.
So pot becomes Puerto.
We see the always splitting into UE
We have the word force in English.
In Spanish it is fuerza.
We have the word school.
In Spanish it is escuela.
We have corp in like corporate which means body.
If corp means body in corporate.
How do you think it is in Spanish?
Cuerpo.
Good.
We have innovative, and this nov in innovative means new.
When you do something innovative, you do something new.
And the word for new in Spanish is nuevo.
So you saw the ore splitting there.
You might have had Pueblo before.
Pueblo means a village or a people.
Population?
in Spanish is one of these exceptions.
It's not poblacion, it's poblacion.
You can see the connection between pob
Lacion, Poblacion, and Pueblo, which means village or people, a people.
You can see the O in Pob splitting to UE in Pueblo
Mortgage, by the way, actually means death pact.
You have mort, which is the Latin root for death, and gauge, which means pact, and the word for dead in Spanish is have a guess.
Muerto or muerte.
Well actually here one you have the noun, la muerte is a d-def.
So the noun is the word you put the in front of.
At school they tell you that it's the the thing
the object, but this is not an object.
We would think of it, we put though in front of it, it's a noun, la muerte.
But then the adjective which is describing is muerto o muerta, o muertos o muertas
So you can see in those words between English and Spanish this phenomenon of this O splitting into UE when it takes the stress.
So this is useful for us for present tense.
We need to know this for present tense
Because if we have a verb like dormir, for example, it has an O in the root, when we stress it it might split.
What do you think dormir means?
Sting still or dormant?
Yeah, what does yeah.
What does dormant mean?
A dormant volcano?
It actually means it's a sleeping volcano.
Oh dormitory.
This is a nice collection to make a swear.
So dormir means to sleep.
How do you say I sleep?
Duermo.
Good.
In Spanish if you want to say I fall asleep, you can say I sleep myself.
So how would that sound?
Me duermo.
Me duermo, which means I fall asleep rather than duermo, I sleep.
So you can say I'm falling asleep, me duermo.
It's so boring.
Me duermo.
He sleeps
Duerme.
Good.
They sleep.
Duermen.
What do you think encontrar means?
Encontrar?
To encounter.
Good, which probably means To meet.
Oh it does.
It means that as well.
But there's a more usual meaning as well.
To find?
Yes.
So I'm finding it or I find it.
How would you say that?
Law ah
Is it encuentro?
Yes, it is.
Lo encuentro.
Good.
Something useful to bear in mind is that different versions of the verb.
either the two form or some other version might be the noun so you mustn't assume always that it's a verb if you see un encuentro
An encounter.
This is now a noun.
Whatever we can put a or the in front of is noun.
So many times some version of the verb will be the noun.
Un encuentro is an encounter, but encuentro I encounter.
Demonstrar was to demonstrate, and if we get rid of this de
We get mostrar, which means to show.
Mostrar.
So how would you say I show?
Mostro.
It would be mostro.
Muestro.
Good.
He shows
Muestre, wait, muestrar muestra.
Good, muestra.
We don't need to roll the R here because it's just one R.
Muestra.
Good.
And una muestra actually is a sample.
So there is a noun there that shares that version.
Muestra, he shows, it shows, she shows, you fool show.
But una muestra is a sample.
They show
Muestran, muestran.
Good.